First draft of the output of the discard keys design team (#1)
DavidSchinazi/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-tls.md

Additional functions might be needed to configure TLS.

### Handshake Complete {#handshake-complete}

In this document, the TLS handshake is considered complete when the TLS stack
has reported that the handshake is complete.  This happens when the TLS stack

> has verified the peer's Finished message.  Verifying the peer's Finished

Reviewer: I agree with MT That this is not write. You should have both sent and received. This matters for client but not server.

Author: Fixed

provides endpoints with an assurance that previous handshake messages have not
been modified.  Note that the handshake does not complete on both endpoints
simultaneously, therefore any requirements placed on endpoints based on the
completion of the handshake are specific to the handshake being complete from
the perspective of the endpoint in question.

### Handshake Confirmed {#handshake-confirmed}

In this document, the TLS handshake is considered confirmed when both of the
following two conditions are met: the handshake is complete and the endpoint
has received an ACK for a packet sent with 1-RTT keys.  This second condition
can be implemented by tracking the lowest packet number sent with 1-RTT keys,

> and the highest value of the Largest Acknowledged field in any received 1-RTT

Reviewer: This would be cleaner if you said "received in any 1-RTT"

Author: Not sure I agree, I think this is editorial and will let the editors wordsmith to this level of detail

from TLS.  TLS might not provide any bytes if the handshake messages it has
received are incomplete or it has no data to send.

In this document, the TLS handshake is considered complete from an endpoint's
perspective when its TLS stack has reported that the handshake is complete.
On the client, the handshake is complete when the TLS stack has verified the
server Finished message.  On the server, this happens when the TLS stack has

> verified either the client Finished message or - in the case that the server

Reviewer 2: Nit: client’s

Author: Fixed

> has chosen to use a pre-shared key - the pre-shared key binder (see

Reviewer 3: This isn't quite right.  The text that you are paraphrasing is talking about the point at which the server considers the client to be authentic.  You are specifically defining "handshake complete", which is always after a Finished from the peer is validated.

Author: Thanks, I've changed the text to reflect that.

and ignoring any outstanding Initial packets.

### Discarding Handshake Keys

> In this document, the TLS handshake is considered confirmed from an endpoint's

Reviewer 3: I would structure this differently, because you come at this obliquely.

"An endpoint can discard Handshake keys when it has confirmed that its peer has completed the TLS handshake.  An endpoint confirms that the handshake is complete at the peer when it receives an acknowledgment for a packet it sent that is protected with 1-RTT keys.  This can be implemented by checking that the largest received acknowledgment for 1-RTT packets exceeds the largest packet number sent with 1-RTT keys.  For clients that don't attempt 0-RTT and servers, any acknowledgment received for the 0-RTT and 1-RTT packet number space is sufficient."

Author: The idea here was to define the term "handshake confirmed" because we use it later on in the document.

Reviewer 3: Yes, but you don't establish why that term is necessary or why I should care about that term in this context.  If you want to define the term only, then create a new section for that.  This section is about disposal of keys.

My suggestion was based on the fact that you don't really rely on this definition very heavily.  Those places that do can cite the section more directly and explain more about the circumstances than rely on terms.  Inventing terms has a real cost in terms of document comprehension that I really want to avoid.

Author: I've moved the definitions to their own subsections, removed "from its perspective" and added references. I think this makes it a lot clearer

perspective when both of the following two conditions are met: the handshake is
complete from this endpoint’s perspective and the endpoint has received an
ACK for a packet sent with 1-RTT keys.  This second condition can be
implemented as checking whether largest_recvd_ack_1rtt >= first_1rtt_pn, where
largest_recvd_ack_1rtt represents the highest value of the Largest Acknowledged
field in any received 1-RTT ACK frame, and where first_1rtt_pn represents the
lowest packet number that this endpoint has sent encrypted with 1-RTT keys
(first_1rtt_pn is always 0 on the server since servers cannot send 0-RTT
packets).

An endpoint MUST NOT discard its handshake keys until the TLS handshake is
confirmed from its perspective.  An endpoint MAY discard its handshake keys

> as soon as it has confirmed the handshake.  Endpoints SHOULD repeatedly send

Reviewer 2: Why not: MUST discard as soon as it has confirmed the handshake?

Author: I don't think discarding handshake keys provides security benefits (unlike initial keys) so I don't see a reason to mandate discarding.

Reviewer 2: Discarding keys is always advisable from a crypto hygiene perspective. I agree it's a lot less critical than discarding the Initial keys. Maybe we can make it a SHOULD?

Author: Agreed. Done.

Reviewer 2: Sorry for re-opening the discussion here, but we now have a MUST discard for 0-RTT keys. All that an attacker can do with 0-RTT packets is to replay them, and the same applies to Handshake keys. Shouldn't we use a MUST for Handshake keys as well then?

Author: I don't think it's quite the same. The server discarding 0-RTT keys prevents a buggy client from sending more requests over 0-RTT when it has 1-RTT. A client can't send application data with handshake keys.

ACK-eliciting frames encrypted with 1-RTT keys as soon as they have installed
those send keys and until they receive an acknowledgment for one of them.

### Discarding 0-RTT Keys

Clients can discard 0-RTT keys as soon as they install 1-RTT keys, since they
have no use after that moment.

Servers SHOULD discard 0-RTT keys as soon as they no longer expect to receive
0-RTT packets.  This can been established by receiving a 1-RTT packet when all
previous packet numbers have been received, or by receiving a 1-RTT packet and

> then waiting until three times the Probe Timeout (PTO, see {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}).

Reviewer 3: We should talk about this.  If knowing the 0-RTT status of packets is important, then it might make sense to drop 0-RTT packets that are reordered to prevent confusing them with 1-RTT.  In our DTLS 0-RTT implementation we've chosen to drop 0-RTT packets as soon as we start accepting 1-RTT packets.  That's something of an implementation choice, but managing the alternative is really tricky because every read needs to be annotated carefully and applications need to ask about every bit.

Author: That makes sense to me, but I'm personally OK with giving implementors leniency since this is a SHOULD. Do you have suggestions on how to phrase this better?

Reviewer 3: If you are allowing flexibility, then this needs to cover the reasons why that flexibility is permitted.  That's harder, and the results won't necessarily be better as a result.  @davidben might have some opinions on what your implementation should do, having built the same for TLS 1.3.

Reviewer 4: TLS 1.3 is fairly straightforward since it's all ordered. We toss the 0-RTT keys as soon as we see/send EndOfEarlyData. That probably wouldn't apply for QUIC.

(I haven't paid a whole lot of attention to this issue and don't have any immediate opinion. I'm happy to chat with folks about it if it'd be useful, and I'm also happy just leaving it in your capable hands and not add too many cooks.)

Reviewer 3: Yeah, TLS is simple.  I thought that you might have thought about what it might look like for DTLS, which is much more like QUIC.

Reviewer 4: Nah, I haven't really done anything with DTLS. I [read through](https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/tls/VNrSd7gv7uFjJNZH6frBt5lb57A) the spec the other day, but that's about it.

Author: I've modified the text to MUST discard, and allow waiting up to 3 PTO

and ignoring any outstanding Initial packets.

### Discarding Handshake Keys

An endpoint MUST NOT discard its handshake keys until the TLS handshake is
confirmed ({{handshake-confirmed}}).  An endpoint SHOULD discard its handshake
keys as soon as it has confirmed the handshake.  Endpoints SHOULD repeatedly
send ACK-eliciting frames encrypted with 1-RTT keys as soon as they have
installed those send keys and until they receive an acknowledgment for one of

> them.

Reviewer: Reading this, it seems like advice that is potentially bad and at least is underspecified (what does "repeatedly") mean/

Just to make sure we are all on the same page, at the time the handshake has completed, you retrospectively know that the handshake keys are correctly tied to the peer's identity, so there's no room for an attacker to inject traffic. The reason to delete these keys aggressively is to provide FS for the data in the handshake, which is relatively low value. I think we should just remove "Endpoints should...". Either the connection is doing stuff in which case you will get an appropriate ACK soon enough, or you will idle timeout relatively quickly, so this SHOULD seems unnecessary.

Author: Changed the text top indicate most application protocols are fine but ones that are not MAY do this

### Discarding 0-RTT Keys

Clients SHOULD discard 0-RTT keys as soon as they install 1-RTT keys, since
they have no use after that moment.

Servers MUST discard 0-RTT keys as soon as they no longer expect to receive
0-RTT packets.  This can been established by receiving a 1-RTT packet when all
previous packet numbers have been received, or by receiving a 1-RTT packet and

> then waiting up to three times the Probe Timeout (PTO, see {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}).

Reviewer: I would rewrite this.

"Once a 1-RTT packet has been received, then no 0-RTT packets with larger packet numbers will be received (assuming a compliant client). Upon receiving the first 1-RTT packet, servers MUST discard the 0-RTT no later than three times the Probe Timeout. If a server tracks all the 0-RTT packet numbers, it can safely discard the 0-RTT keys when all packets up to the first 1-RTT packets have been received. Note that even if the 0-RTT keys are discarded prematurely, the packets will eventually retransmitted".

Author: I don't think I prefer your wording. I think this is editorial and will let the editors wordsmith to this level of detail

Reviewer 3: This isn't quite editorial.  I have a few concerns with ekr's proposed text, but it has some useful pieces.  With a rewrite...

1. Context.  The statement: "A compliant client will not send 0-RTT packets after it starts sending 1-RTT packets." is relevant.

2. Reordering happens: "After receiving a 1-RTT packet, a server might need to retain 0-RTT keys to allow for reordered packets.  Retaining keys for up to three times the Probe Timeout (PTO, ...) ensures that packets are not dropped as a result of prematurely discarding keys."

3. And this is only a maybe for me: "A server can discard keys earlier once it receives all 0-RTT packets."

Reviewer: I think MT's proposal is basically OK. I would prefer to include something like the last sentence to explain why 3PTO is just a compromise and not  a perfect guarantee of safety, but also that it doesn't create a deadlock or lost data if you are too aggressive.

Reviewer 5: 3PTO seems way too long. The server only needs to keep the keys around to match out of order delivery delays. The PTO itself is defined in the recovery spec as:
```
PTO = smoothed_rtt + max(4*rttvar, kGranularity) + max_ack_delay
```
In that formula, the middle component accounts for out of order delivery. If we believe that, the server only needs to keep the 0-RTT keys around for `max(4*rttvar, kGranularity)`.

Note that dropping packets is not the end of the world -- dropped packets will be retransmitted. If the ACK of the 0-RTT packet is not received by the client 1 PTO after it was sent, the content will be retransmitted in an 1-RTT packet. That retransmitted packet will be received at most 1 RTT after the first 1-RTT packet, which means the server has no reason to keeping the 0-RTT keys around longer than 1-RTT after the first 1-RTT packet is received.

Reviewer 6: @huitema I am not sure if using `max(4*rttvar, kGranularity)` is the correct thing to do, because the impact of reordering going above the threshold is different.

At the moment `max(4*rttvar, kGranularity)` is used to trigger a retransmission. The effect is wasting 1 MTU at most (there would be no loss at all if the sender choose something other to send than the packet that was deemed lost). Dropping key leads to a packet that leads to a real packet loss. That'd have negative impact on CC.

Therefore, I'd prefer having a conservative recommendation than `max(4*rttvar, kGranularlity)`, and reusing 3PTO here seems like a good choice, even though I agree that it might be longer than necessary.

Author: I've rephrased the text in such a way that the context is clearer and the server can discard its 0-RTT keys at any point between receiving the first 1-RTT packet, and 3*PTO after that. This allows implementors to decide how long they wish to wait.

to decrypt 1-RTT packets from the server, whereas a server will be able to
decrypt 1-RTT packets from the client.

In this document we consider the server to have verified the identity of the
client when either the handshake is complete from the server's perspective,
or - in the case that the server has chosen to use a pre-shared key - when it
has validated the pre-shared key binder (see Section 4.2.11 of [TLS13]).

The server has access to 1-RTT keys after receiving the first handshake
messages from a client, which can happen before it has verified the identity of
the client.  Therefore, a server MUST NOT process data from incoming 1-RTT
protected packets before it has verified the client's identity.  In particular,

> it MUST NOT send acknowledgments for 1-RTT packets until then.  Packets

Reviewer 3: This MUST NOT send acknowledgements bit is not quite right given the definition of "verified the client's identity" you are using, because that would allow the server to process 1-RTT packets without having seen the client's second flight.  I think that there are two things we need to be pushing on:

1. You need the PSK binder to confirm client identity before you send 0.5 RTT data (that is, any data sent by the server prior to handshake completion).  Before that, you are working with no knowledge of the identity of the client.  Even with a PSK binder, you don't have proof that there isn't an active attack on the connection until the handshake is complete.

2. Handshake completion is necessary for anything except those small exceptions we allow for 0-RTT.

Here, I would argue that the best option is to wait for handshake completion before using or acknowledging 1-RTT packets.  That's strictly less than what we have allowed for, but it avoids complications.  The point of the text about client identity is to enable use of client authentication - carried over from a resumed connection - in processing of 0-RTT.  It's not a broad license to ignore the rest of the handshake.

Author: I agree that waiting until the handshake is complete is safer. I've changed the text to require that.

to decrypt 1-RTT packets from the server, whereas a server will be able to
decrypt 1-RTT packets from the client.

> Until the handshake is considered complete, the connection and key exchange

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Until the handshake is complete, the connection and key exchange
```

Author: Fixed

are not properly authenticated at the server.  Even though 1-RTT keys are
available to a server after receiving the first handshake messages from a
client, the server cannot consider the client to be authenticated until its

> TLS stack has indicated the handshake to be complete.  Therefore, a server

Reviewer 3: See previous comment about the conditions for authentication of a peer.  This confuses them a little.

Basically, with a PSK binder you can be assured of identity before the handshake is complete.

Author: Made changes to this effect

MUST NOT process data from incoming 1-RTT protected packets before the TLS
handshake is complete from its perspective.  In particular, it MUST NOT send
acknowledgments for 1-RTT packets until the TLS handshake is complete.
Packets protected with 1-RTT keys MAY be stored and later decrypted and used
once the handshake is complete.

The requirement for the server to wait for the client Finished message creates
a dependency on that message being delivered.  A client can avoid the

> potential for head-of-line blocking that this implies by sending their 1-RTT

Reviewer 2: Nit: s/their/its

Author: Fixed

to decrypt 1-RTT packets from the server, whereas a server will be able to
decrypt 1-RTT packets from the client.

Until the handshake is complete, the connection and key exchange are not
properly authenticated at the server.  In the case that the server has chosen
to use a pre-shared key, validating the client's pre-shared key binder (see
Section 4.2.11 of [TLS13]) provides assurances on the identity of the client
but does not guarantee that previous handshake messages have not been tampered

> with.  Even though 1-RTT keys are available to a server after receiving the

Reviewer: This is hard to read. Do you mean CH1/HRR? Because if so, that's not correct, because CH1 and HRR are part of the CH2 binder.

Author: Can you suggest better text?

Reviewer: I don't know what it is trying to say.

Reviewer 6: Clarification question: am I correct in assuming that the rewrite of this paragraph is editorial? I'm asking this because, assuming that is the case, all the unresolved discussions on the PR seem to be editorial.

Author: @kazuho I do agree that this is editorial. This text tries to explain the rationale for why the server MUST NOT process 1-RTT frames until it's completed the handshake. If the text is unclear to @ekr then I agree that it needs to be better written. Can someone offer text suggestions for wordsmithing here? The reason I had modified the text in the first place was that this seemed to flow better now that we've formalized the definition of handshake complete in its own subsection. But I'm happy to change this, or even happier to let the editors decide how best to word this.

Reviewer 3: I think that there are two things to say, and you want to use two paragraphs (or more).

1. A server can send 1-RTT data to the client before completing the handshake, but it does so with limitations:

   a. The client is not authenticated unless there is a PSK binder.
   b. The client has not demonstrated liveness, so ...
   c. Any received 0-RTT data that the server responds to might be due to a replay attack.

2. Otherwise, until the handshake is complete, don't send or receive 1-RTT packets.  Endpoints will build strong assumptions about the identity of peers when they send or process 1-RTT packets that might be incorrect if those packets are sent without allowing the handshake to complete.

Reviewer: Yes, this seems good.

Author: I've used these suggestions to refactor the text

first handshake messages from a client, the server cannot consider the client
to be fully authenticated until its TLS stack has indicated the handshake to be
complete.  Therefore, a server MUST NOT process data from incoming 1-RTT
protected packets before the TLS handshake is complete.  In particular, it
MUST NOT send acknowledgments for 1-RTT packets until the TLS handshake is
complete.  Packets protected with 1-RTT keys MAY be stored and later decrypted

> and used once the handshake is complete.

Reviewer: I'm not proposing changing the existing advice right now but actually I believe it would be fine to send ACKs prior to receiving CFIN, as long as the data in them wasn't used, because either the handshake is valid in which case the ACKs are fine, or the handshake is not, in which case you'll just abort the connection and who cares if you send ACKs to the attacer.

Author: We explicitly want to ban ACKs because the peer relies on those ACKs to determine if the handshake is confirmed.

Reviewer: My point is that this does not offer security value.

At this point in the handshake you have the following situation:

- The server has a connection to someone but doesn't yet know who it is.
- The client (either a valid client or an attacker) has a connection to the server.

And the ACKs in question are being sent by the server, Whether the client is the attacker or the server, the packets were genuinely received. Note that even at this point, if the connection is to a valid client, it is not possible for the attacker to inject packets which would elicit a valid ACK from the server, because that would require them to have the keys, which they won't have.

To be clear, it's not safe to process any frames in the packet at this point. But what should be safe is to decrypt the packet, store the frame and send an ACK.

I could of course be wrong, but I would suggest trying to write out an attack on this if you think so.

Reviewer: After talking to David offline, I see the disconnect here.

The location of the text here implies that not sending ACKs at this point is a *security* condition, but it's not. It's a correctness condition for handshake completeness, because then you can't guarantee delivery of the client's second flight. So this text should move elsewhere.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this is still relevant after your offline discussion, but we defined the condition for sending an ACK as having received the packet and having processed all the frames.

Author: I agree with @ekr's second comment, this is not a security condition. This is just a clarification because, as @marten-seemann pointed out, you cannot send an ACK until you've processed the frames.

Reviewer 3: I think that ekr is right about the location of the ACK text.  The reason for the ACK rule is to provide us something concrete to depend on for the "confirmed" thing and that could go elsewhere.  But I wouldn't phrase it as a rule (with "MUST"), but explain how it's a consequence of other rules.

The rule that matters is the one that says that you don't process 1-RTT packets until you consider the handshake complete.  That the server doesn't ACK 1-RTT packets until the handshake is complete is a natural consequence of that.

Reviewer: Yes, I mostly agree with this. Where I'm starting from here is that there is another set of consistent rules that would be safe.

1. You can ACK packets as soon as deprotect them, whether you process them or not
2. You can't use the contents of a 1-RTT packet until the handshake is complete (so in case #1 you might buffer the plaintext).
3. Implementations use some other mechanism than ACKs to drop the handshake keys.

Only point (2) above follows from the security semantics of TLS.

Author: I rephrased the ACK text to be a note that is a natural conclusion from other normative text instead of its own new normative text

to decrypt 1-RTT packets from the server, whereas a server will be able to
decrypt 1-RTT packets from the client.

Until the handshake is complete, the connection and key exchange are not

> properly authenticated at the server.  In the case that the server has chosen

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
properly authenticated.  In the case that the server has chosen
```

Author: Done

message as a connection error of type 0x10a, equivalent to a fatal TLS alert of
unexpected_message (see {{tls-errors}}).

An endpoint MUST NOT initiate the first key update until the handshake is

> confirmed from its perspective. An endpoint MUST NOT initiate a subsequent

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
confirmed complete. An endpoint MUST NOT initiate a subsequent
```

Author: The idea here is that we want the handshake to be confirmed, not just complete

Reviewer 3: This leans less on the definition of a new term and more on the text I suggested before.  This is the one place you rely on that term, so I would say that a strictly defined term isn't necessary, particularly one as long as "handshake is confirmed from its perspective".

Author: I think the shorter term with a reference reads well now

key update until it has received an ACK for a packet sent at the previous
KEY_PHASE.  This can be implemented as checking whether

> largest_recvd_ack_1rtt >= last_key_update_pn, where largest_recvd_ack_1rtt

Reviewer 3: I think that I prefer words.  "This requires tracking the lowest packet number sent with updated keys.  Once an acknowledgment for that packet number or any higher packet number is received, another key update can be initiated."

Author: Switched to using words

represents the highest value of the Largest Acknowledged field in any received

> 1-RTT ACK frame, and where last_key_update_pn represents the lowest packet

Reviewer 2: Do we need to say that you must verify that the Largest Acked matches a packet that you actually sent?

Author: That's already discussed in the transport document

number that this endpoint sent using keys from the previous KEY_PHASE.

Endpoints only need to maintain the two latest sets of packet protection keys
and MAY discard older keys.  Updating keys multiple times rapidly can cause
packets to be effectively lost if packets are significantly delayed.
Therefore, an endpoint SHOULD NOT initiate a key update until three times the
PTO after it has last updated keys. This avoids valid reordered packets being

> dropped by the peer because the peer may have discarded older keys, and reduces

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
dropped by the peer because the peer could have discarded older keys.
```

Author: Fixed

> the computational overhead of key updates over the entire connection.

Reviewer 3: I don't think that we need to talk about computational overhead here.

```suggestion
```

Author: Fair enough, fixed

message as a connection error of type 0x10a, equivalent to a fatal TLS alert of
unexpected_message (see {{tls-errors}}).

An endpoint MUST NOT initiate the first key update until the handshake is
confirmed ({{handshake-confirmed}}). An endpoint MUST NOT initiate a subsequent
key update until it has received an ACK for a packet sent at the previous
KEY_PHASE.  This can be implemented by tracking the lowest packet number sent
with the previous KEY_PHASE, and the highest value of the Largest Acknowledged

> field in any received 1-RTT ACK frame: once the latter is higher than the

Reviewer: See previous comment about this.

Author: Same response

If the packet can be decrypted and authenticated using the updated key and IV,
then the keys the endpoint uses for packet protection are also updated.  The
next packet sent by the endpoint MUST then use the new keys.  Once an endpoint
has sent a packet encrypted with a given key phase, it MUST NOT send a packet

> encrypted with a strictly older key phase.

Reviewer 2: Why strictly older? Just older should be sufficient.

Author: Fixed
